---
title:  "Understanding the Roles that Muscles Play in the Body "
date:   2016-07-06 12:25:09
excerpt: "Understanding your muscles are important because they are the way the body creates..."
permalink: understanding-muscles
image: https://s3.amazonaws.com/reelmovement/hipflexor.jpg
---


<p>    
Muscles account for nearly half of the body’s weight and are of interest to many fields of health care and fitness. Regardless of whether or not your occupation is in the health industry, it is important to understand the various roles that muscles play throughout the body in order to aid you in your fitness journey. There are over 600 muscles in the human body. Of these, skeletal muscles make up 215 pairs. The muscles in the body have many properties and roles. </p>

<h2>Properties of Muscle</h2>

<div>
<ol>
<li>Excitability:  The muscle’s sensitivity to chemical, electrical, and mechanical stimuli</li>

<li>Contractility: The ability of the muscle to develop tension or internal force in response to stimuli </li>

<li>Extensibility:  The muscles ability to be passively and actively stretched beyond its normal resting length.</li>

<li>Elasticity: The muscles ability to return to its resting length after it has been stretch passed its resting length </li>

</ol>
</div>


<h2>Role of Muscles</h2> 

<p>The main role of the muscle is movement. The muscle contracts and it simply attempts to pull the bones. The result is that the less stable bone moves toward the more stable bone which causes movement. Each muscle usually plays various roles.</p>

<h2>Agonist </h2>

<p>The agonist is the prime mover meaning it does the majority of work and causes the movement that is desired</p>

<h2>Antagonist </h2>

<p>The antagonist has the opposite effect of the agonist. It causes the opposing muscle to relax in order for the agonist to create movement <p>

<h2>Stabilizers </h2>

<p>The stabilizers surround the joint and provide support in order for the body segment to produce force and move </p>

<h2>Synergist </h2>

<p>Synergists assist the agonist in movement. They are also known as guiding muscles </p>

<h2>Neutralizers</h2>

<p>The neutralizers counteract the action of other muscles in order to prevent inappropriate muscle substitutions which can often lead to muscle imbalances.</p>

<p>These are not the only roles the muscles play in the body (for instance the muscles also provide 85% of one’s body heat) but they are important to know because they are the way the body creates movement and movement is what leads us to better health and wellness.</p>

	<p>Founder and CEO of Reel Movement </p>

	<p>Daniel Ponce</p>

 





